---
title: Googling dates
published: 2018-06-07
---

::: {.author-note}
Author's note: I wrote this a while ago, but decided that I wanted to
look up and add some statistics before publishing it.  That's probably
never going to happen, so here is the post as it stands.
:::

I've started reading Jon Ronson's *So You've Been Publicly Shamed*,
which has been on my list for a while after I've enjoyed much of his
other work.  In the fourth chapter, he quotes Justine Sacco, whose
somewhat racist tweet went viral while she was on an 11-hour flight,
as saying 'it's not like I can date, because we google everyone we
might date'.  Now, I'm not particularly interested in the morals of
what happened to Justine Sacco and her tweet (though I might have some
thoughts for a later post after I finish the book), but this sentence
caught my attention.  The idea of looking online to see if some
romantic interest had a shady past of off-colour jokes on social media
would never occur to me.

I'm certainly not so na√Øve to be unaware that people do this.  But
what makes me different?  The two things that first come to mind are
nationality and gender.  I am an English man, and Justine Sacco is a
South African-American woman.  It would be very surprising if we had
an identical experience of dating.  Still, gender perhaps is less
likely: Sacco is talking about her potential partners, not herself,
and if she is interested in men, then that includes me.  So it is more
likely down to culture or simply personality differences[^1].

Bemoaning the Americani{s/z}ation of British culture is one of many
celebrated national pastimes, and by no means is the world of romance
exempt from trans-Atlantic influence, perhaps significantly due to
American-based websites.  Still, we are different {to/from/than} our
cousins across the pond and obviously so will be our behavio{u}r with
respect to relationships.

British people are stereotypically more reserved and respectful of
status differences than Americans.  We still enjoy gossip behind
people's backs, but social class is often given away through speech
and mannerisms, obviating much of a need to research someone's
background.  I don't have much concrete to back this up, but it
doesn't feel too difficult to justify myself using national tendencies
in this way.

On the other hand, my justification of the previous paragraph feels a
little like a just-so story, and I suspect that I could come up with
an equally convincing argument in the other direction had my initial
intuition been different.  What I am best qualified to talk about is
of course my own experience.  How much do I pry into people's online
presence before I go on a date with them?

Clearly if I already know a person then this whole discussion is
academic, so we are probably talking about someone I've just met, most
likely through online dating.  The content of a profile description is
a starting point (interestingly unique to online dating, absent if you
meet in a pub, at a concert or somewhere similar).  If I'm
particularly interested, then I might look up their social media
accounts, although in search of more posts, more pictures and more
personality rather than a life history.  I tend to hold off sending
actual friend requests until we've met a few times and established
some actual in-person chemistry.

But why do I take this approach, and why isn't researching all this
information appealing to me?  Fundamentally, I think it comes down to
three things.  Firstly, it simply feels like an intrusion.  This
possibly comes from my British reservedness and natural introversion,
but I don't particularly like the idea of someone googling me, and
therefore I reciprocally choose not to do it to others.  Mostly it's
probably not a significant problem, since people can control to some
extent what is publicly associated with them, but I prefer to err on
the side of caution.  Secondly, and somewhat relatedly, the simple act
of finding out about each other is a major part of the point and fun
of dating people.  I could google someone and find their name on a
list of graduates of some university, or I could listen to them talk
about what they studied, hear why they find that interesting, where
the best pubs are in that city and what memorable stories happened in
them.

And finally, I think the most important part of a person is how they
think and act now, not five years ago.  I hold willingness to forgive
as a cardinal virtue, and knowledge of some past crime only matters to
me as a prior for that person doing it again.  If they can convince me
that they repent of whatever grevious sin is hiding in their past,
then I will not hold it against them.  I don't mean to imply that
someone's past is completely insignificant: of course personal history
has a huge effect on the present self.  But we are not our mistakes.
What matters is our ability to accept them and their consequences, to
learn from them and to avoid making them all over again.


[^1]: Although perhaps she is falling prey to the [typical mind
	fallacy], a common trap where people assume that others reason in
	the same way as themselves.  I can imagine that a woman who could
	reasonably feel more vulnerable to predatory partners than a man
	would might want to be more confident of a date's background.

[typical mind fallacy]: https://wiki.lesswrong.com/wiki/Typical_mind_fallacy
