---
title: Links for March 2019
---

David R. MacIver writes about "[the Core Problem with
Democracy](https://notebook.drmaciver.com/posts/2019-02-27-12:03.html)".
Under some (unrealistic?) independence assumptions, a vote on "A and
B" may fail, even if most of the population individually believe A and
B.  I wonder how related this is to [Simpson's
paradox](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Simpson%27s_paradox).  The
conclusion includes the interesting observation that democracy often
conflates values ("how should the world look?") and judgement ("how do
we make the world look that way?").  Robin Hanson's
"[futarchy](http://mason.gmu.edu/~rhanson/futarchy.html)" responds to
this distinction, and so does Scott Alexander's fictional [Shining
Garden](https://slatestarcodex.com/2013/05/06/raikoth-laws-language-and-society/).

[Commento](https://commento.io/) is a Disqus-like commenting platform
which emphasises privacy and speed.  A paid hosted version is
available, but it's
[open-source](https://gitlab.com/commento/commento) and so
self-hosting is an option.  I haven't enabled comments here yet
because I don't particularly trust a service like Disqus, and other
solutions are a pain with a statically generated site.  The one
hesitation I have before installing Commento is being slightly
distrustful of requiring Javascript.  It's currently "necessary" to
view rendered MathJax, but it somewhat gracefully degrades to the raw
TeX code.  Also, in 2019, it doesn't seem too onerous to require JS
for something non-essential like comments.
