---
title: Links for April 2019
---

[Berkson's paradox](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Berkson's_paradox)
is a counterintuitive result which most often manifests as falsely
observing a negative correlation between independent variables when
one mistakenly only sees cases when at least one of them occurs.
Wikipedia's example: 'For example, a person may observe from their
experience that fast food restaurants in their area which serve good
hamburgers tend to serve bad fries and vice versa; but because they
would likely not eat anywhere where both were bad, they fail to allow
for the large number of restaurants in this category which would
weaken or even flip the correlation.'

[Colin Wright](https://twitter.com/ColinTheMathmo) is mostly famous
for inventing the juggling notation known as 'siteswap', but was in
fact a maths PhD supervised by Béla Bollabás at Cambridge.  He has a
blog full of interesting puzzles and others, including a series of
twists on the classical 'rope around the Earth' problem.  [This
one](https://www.solipsys.co.uk/new/TheOtherWrappingTheEarthProblem.html)
is my favourite.

During the Second World War, the US was developing a revolutionary new
method of incendiary bomb delivery: [hibernating
bats](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bat_bomb).  It was only cancelled
because the Manhattan project was progressing more quickly.  I can
only wonder at the world in which incendiary bat bombs were the threat
on which the Cold War was built instead of nuclear weapons.

[Why can't font size be set on
`a:visited`?](https://jameshfisher.com/2019/03/08/why-cant-i-set-the-font-size-of-a-visited-link)
Surprising things that have to be done in the name of privacy.

OpenType font shaping is [Turing
complete](https://litherum.blogspot.com/2019/03/addition-font.html),
although this requires a custom HarfBuzz build to increase the
recursion limit past 6.

[Long post on Status as a
Service](https://www.eugenewei.com/blog/2019/2/19/status-as-a-service),
and how social capital is the real motive behind people's behaviour on
social networks.

[NYT article on a carbon dioxide scrubbing
startup.](https://www.nytimes.com/2019/02/12/magazine/climeworks-business-climate-change.html)
Encouraging ideas, but seems energetically implausible.  [John
Baez](https://johncarlosbaez.wordpress.com/2019/03/02/negative-carbon-emissions/)
writes about similar ideas.

'Why are you reading about [airships]?' 'Because airships are cool.'
Back-of-the-envelope calculations (admittedly by an airship blog)
suggest that giant cargo airships could be a trillion dollar industry
(the calculations are rough enough that what we mean by that doesn't
matter: could be market cap, revenue, value of assets...).  They offer
a previously nonexistent low-cost, medium speed transport method that
is agnostic of land or sea.  From the point of view of carbon, they
are encouraging in that they only require energy to go forwards,
although drag is a big concern and hydrogen is fairly expensive to
produce.

[airships]: https://www.roadlessrevolution.com/2019/02/why-giant-airships-could-be-trillion.html
