---
title: Why write?
published: 2018-03-21
---

Why, when I rebuilt this website, did I include a blog portion fairly
front-and-centre?  In 2018, it seems that everyone just [shoots an
unfiltered stream of consciousness onto the internet][twitter] or
*maybe* has a Medium account for slightly more fully-baked ideas.
Sure, there are a few blogs still around, but they mostly seem to be
historical artefacts left over from a bygone age.

I've never been a prolific blogger or writer of anything much in
particular.  At school, essay subjects were my least favourite, and
after my English GCSE, the most words I put together in one go were in
my UCAS personal statement.  Over my undergraduate degree I ended up
writing more, as higher level maths leads to more involved proofs
needing more explanation, but it's a very different style to general
prose.

On the other hand, from a young age I was a prolific reader.  I think
I mostly inherited this from my mother, but it became an important
part of my personality growing up.  I wasn't fussy: novels, short
stories, popular science books, random magazines lying around the
house.  My reading habit has waxed and waned over the years, but I was
always aware of the existence of people who put words together for a
living.

Now I'm a PhD student, and for the first time I have to write journal
papers and eventually (though a lot sooner than I like to think about)
a full thesis.  The most consistent piece of writing advice I've seen
is simply to write as much as possible and not care that the first x
thousand words will suck.  So one reason is definitely to get to the
the point of being able to explain complex topics clearly and
engagingly, at least to expert audiences.

With that said, merely practising the art of writing isn't the only
motivating factor.  I haven't come up with a title or tagline for this
website mostly to leave myself the freedom to write what I, and
hopefully others, find interesting.  Granted, so far that's been
[weird parts of category theory] and [overcoming very specific
technical issues in little-used software][hakyll], but I have some
thoughts about the broader world of modern society and technology that
I want to get to very soon.  In fact, this post is at least the start
of unravelling all those issues.

Another aspect is to [rubber-duck] my life in some sense.  It's a
common experience to start asking some question (technical or
otherwise) and realise that the act of structuring it into words makes
the solution clearer, and I hope to be able to apply this to real-life
situations I find myself in, ideally where I can come up with some
novel or useful observation.  I don't have anything particular in mind
in this genre yet, but it's something that I want to leave myself open
to.

And finally, I may eventually have some political or philosophical
opinions I want to clarify and share.  This builds on my previous
point, as the aim is to not only rubber-duck myself into some sort of
coherent thinking, but also force myself to do the research.  I'm a
big believer in intellectual humility, and there's a lot that I freely
admit I don't know enough about to have even a private opinion of.

So this post will stand, at least for now, as my justification for
this exercise in putting words on the internet.  As always, if you
have any comments, feedback or anything else to say to me, I'd welcome
it via email, Twitter, carrier pigeon or any other means of contact
you have.

[twitter]: https://twitter.com/jshholland
[weird parts of category theory]: /posts/kleisli-lifting-distributive/
[hakyll]:  /posts/hakyll-clean-urls-feeds/
[rubber-duck]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rubber_duck_debugging
